You can use the footage to make like a... Oh, does it need one of these?
I think you got one on there.
Okay.
Oh, okay.
I see it.
Sorry.
This is very... I think David and Tom were wearing them yesterday.
I'm gonna do this real quick.
A little... Surprisingly helpful for trying to keep track of when the heck stuff is.
Alright.
Does it timestamp anything?
Yeah.
It's probably in the metadata.
Yeah, no problem.
Vincent, have you got a partner?
I do.
All right.
Somebody stole me.
That's all right.
Let's see.
Do you have a partner?
Probably not.
Can I work with you, Megan?
Yes, I would love that.
Fantastic.
Have you got a partner?
Alright.
Are you trying to trade me already?
I was trying to include people that might not have a partner.
Good, how are you?
Everything good?
It's great.
Did it go over your last line?
It did.
I slipped.
I didn't get attacked.
Nope, I grabbed a pencil.
How'd you sleep last night?
Aw, hell.
Your alarm woke me up, thank God, because I was dead.
Really?
Yeah.
At 7.40.
OK.
And I was like, Megan, we have to get out.
I didn't think it was that loud.
No, I needed it.
And it's also my ringer on my phone.
So I was tuned in because of the sounds, right?
So I was like, oh, yeah.
I was like, my phone.
Y'all can go down towards where Frances is.
I would have been linked to everything.
I meant to send this to her.
We did something like this in my high school class and I thought I would be clever.
And I picked someone with a really, really big tree as my one meter square.
But the problem was the teacher and my dad had been friends for 20 some years and he knew that I was trying to be clever.
He says, you got to count all the species up there.
Hey, let's count off.
One, two, three.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10!
12.
Tell the bears we're here.
We're missing 13?
Yes.
You're 12?
13.
14.
What's the point of the numbers?
Well, someone's missing.
15.
But who's missing?
16.
She hasn't had any.
She's laying down.
Where's 17 at?
I'm 17.
Hey, oh, OK.
We're all here.
So this is what we're going to do.
You know, depending on what grade level, you might want to amp this up a little bit, right?
You might actually want to categorize by species name and use iNaturalist or use a key, whatever feels comfortable to you.
But what we're going to do today is we're going to identify species by just a letter.
So don't be confused between these species letters and the letters of like the ABCs that Josh was referring to earlier.
So what we're going to do first is we're going to run a preliminary trial.
What we're going to do in our groups, we're going to grab a hula hoop
And you're just gonna toss this and do a little random sampling.
And you're gonna come over here with your partner.
One partner's gonna time you.
Okay, the other person's gonna look, or maybe together, right?
You're gonna look and try to identify all the different things you see in this little hula hoop, okay?
And what I'd like you to do is actually pick out one sample of each as a representative for each of the individual species you see.
Does that make sense?
Right?
And then we'll
The first time, we're going to have eight minutes to do this.
So when eight minutes expires, we're done looking at this.
Then what you'll do is you'll move on to stage two.
And I'm going to give you further instruction at that point.
Is that cool?
So after you're done identifying what looks different from one another, then you're just going to pause and hang until I give you further instruction.
All right.
And pick your samples.
Find a spot, toss that hula hoop, and then set that timer to eight minutes.
Well, let's not do the gravel.
I learned my lesson on that.
Sure.
All right.
So.
one and go for it get it got this grass that's another i think that's the same i think that's just a flower is this a different species of grass this looks different it's much thinner yeah i think so
Okay, that's... So lots of clover, lots of plantain, lots of grass.
We've got some moss here.
The way I've done it in the past is just like we're gathering today.
Oh, that is some kind of goo.
Is that a decomposing leaf?
I think you're right.
Of course I thought it was something more exotic.
Right, it looked a little slime moldy, but I think it might be a decomposing leaf.
I'm kind of using the pencil.
My fingers are a little blunt.
This looks like a different species of moss.
This one looks like fern-like.
That one looks a little more carpet-y to me.
I like the language.
Not really.
It's descriptive.
That might even be a third.
What about this speedy little grass?
I think that's a different one than that.
I think that's a third species.
Oh, this guy just flew into our territory.
Non-modal, Josh.
Oh, OK.
Thanks for the reminder.
What was it, though?
I mean, it looked like a little.
I don't see it.
It's gone now.
OK.
Just here, just there.
Just gone.
It's not an ant, too, but all right, non-modal.
Yeah.
Is this the same?
I see what was happening.
When you guys are done getting all your species, can you just bring them up to the sidewalk?
Sure.
Thanks.
yeah that looks a little I don't know that looks a little bit like this which I don't I didn't get a sample of but that's that's so tiny I don't know about that's just so small I'm not sure we can even pull that up I can't if you can get something out of that that might be a different
So how many have we got?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven?
Wait, no.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
And this does look different than... I don't know, but it's the same.
These might be the same.
It's definitely different from that one.
Are you guys gonna be good?
I think so.
We've got eight species probably.
Nothing else is popping out at me.
It's a pretty good amount though.
So this is what I want you guys to do now.
I want you to look at your artifacts, and I want you to make observations on each one.
Don't bother giving it a name yet, right?
We're just trying to describe and discern the difference between the samples we collected.
Write a little unique description for each, okay?
And if you want you can name them, but that will change as we get a group consensus out of it, okay?
Yes?
Sure, you can draw if you'd like as well.
Does this point the right way?
Um, I'm gonna set another timer for eight minutes.
That may or may not be it.
I'm done.
All right.
I think we just got a bunch of footage here from your stomach.
Great.
That's real nice.
Let me know if you're confused.
Okay, so main differences.
Um, these kind of feather out more.
Right.
So I'll just... We've got kind of a feathery moss and kind of a carpety moss.
Oh dear.
I think that part yeah I think because that looks like something we were looking at earlier mm-hmm that little one so maybe all right thank you I don't know kind of hard to tell cuz they're so small
Maybe that's a separate one.
I don't know.
What do you think?
I am not the best.
They look different.
I think they're different.
Okay.
So we'll just make another.
One's a very small carpet.
The other is very, or a larger.
Yeah.
They kind of almost look spiky.
Like a little,
little evergreen almost right yeah okay so i'm just gonna put skinny grass medium grass thick grass okay so that's plantain broadleaf plantain this is clover and then you said i said skinny medium and fat grass skinny medium thick grass i don't know is that eight yeah so and then
I just kind of went this way.
Yep, that's good.
Do you do this with your kids?
Haven't yet.
I've thought about trying it, but.
We could probably do it at the end in that last next unit maybe, I think.
It'd be a good workup to going out to the pond.
Yeah.
So, you know how the lessons are kind of like, they're a lot shorter than their class length is.
Are you just going to like, supplement the time?
Are you talking bio one?
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Because I was thinking about maybe using like data classroom, whatever time's left over, instead of just like combining them, stuff like that.
We'll get through that so quick if we do.
I don't know, we'll see.
Fall semester, I only have two honors.
And so that's gonna be easy to like, let them, usually it's easy to let them get talking and you can take up a huge chunk.
It's like one minute, good.
You guys need more than a minute.
Right, like stick two of them together.
How's two minutes now?
How many minutes you need?
I got tons of time.
We got like 40 minutes.
What do you need?
Well, we don't have 20 minutes for you, Jill.
Number 12.
Get out of here, number 12.
13 and 16.
So remember, just when you're chilling and listening, based on your student level, you can do this at all sorts of different levels, right?
You can go into this much detail that he's kind of orchestrating for higher, junior, senior level, and you can go as simple as middle school, which is literally what's different, take a picture of it, give it a letter, and why is it different, right?
And then that's it, you're still identifying, you can still compare biodiversity and the species and everything.
So I told the group over here that when I first did this with my juniors, we finished and they were like, that's it, that's all you want me to do?
And I was like, okay, maybe that wasn't good enough.
So you can hear I've been trying to make it a little bit more complex and I'm definitely gonna throw in what he's doing now to make it even more advanced.
So yeah, pretty cool.
We're gonna go up there and stick a species and see if we found the same species.
Yeah, one more will be perfect.
I like doing that with the cars.
We did that last year and
Toyota had 73 and the second place had like 40 something.
Did you do it for your AP class?
Yeah.
How are your scores of 501?
Below state average for the most part.
Well, no, but no.
Sorry, I'm thinking back to
Spring there.
For fall they were both state and county average because I had honors.
For fall they were definitely below.
Fall I had CP.
Sorry, fall I had honors, spring I had CP.
Hey if you have your species ready there's still a couple groups working but everyone else you can come over here and you're gonna lay them out just kind of in this area here.
Yeah, lay them out so everyone can see them.
All right, clover.
Yeah, and you can serve the categories though.
This looks like the same grass.
Yeah, let's spread them out a little bit.
Yeah, and then lay it down over there.
Spread them out so everyone can see them.
Ooh, okay.
Oh, you got that.
You got our third grass.
Yeah.
Plantain.
That's a dandelion.
Dandelion, oh.
Yeah, that looks like most of a dandelion leaf.
Oh.
And we've got
three well no three different mosses we believe well move that one over so because it's the smallest here's the little whiskey okay i think i have a different grass he wasn't that was the different one right yeah he wasn't branching like these guys like i think maybe are these are you guys joining
This thing doesn't like it if I lean over.
I'm just wondering if that is the same kind of grass as this, just thinner.
All right, time is expired.
We'll have to decide.
So yeah, you're good at the moment.
Lay out your samples.
Do you guys see this tiny one right here, too?
Mm-hmm.
All right.
Yeah, yeah, go ahead.
David, we're kind of sampling over here.
That's cool.
OK.
This one is a dandelion, so he's actually separate.
One part with the flower.
So as you guys bring over your samples, you'll be organizing and lumping them with their lights.
There's like three different types of grass.
There's like super wispy, medium, and super thick.
Oh, is there a fourth one?
Okay.
Anybody else have this green flame tea grid?
No, I think that's a new one.
It's okay, we have another board.
Yeah, that's good.
I think it's also labeled F on that sheet.
Alright, we have all our samples.
So, this is a really good way to get group consensus.
By all means you don't have to do this and collect a class or multiple class data set, but there's a really good way to think about like, regardless of what you're doing, thinking about what kind of measurement uncertainty you're dealing with, right?
So if you're measuring stem length, where are we measuring the radical from or whatever?
So I like to group up students and as a group we come up with our rules so that we all are operating under the same protocol, so that when we collect all our data we can use it to run
We have a higher sample size, we can run some descriptive statistics, right?
We can get that bell curve.
So... I think you might have some new ones.
This one right here looks like a completely different... Yeah, we've got some... The plantain goes there.
And I don't think anybody else has the strawberry.
Another reason why we chose to use the grass is because we're thinking in terms of school property.
What do you have access to?
So there's many directions you could take this.
You could do like comparison between forest and lawn or just different places of the schoolyard.
Maybe where one area of the schoolyard gets more sun exposure, right?
Something like this.
A lot of room to differentiate.
So
What we have lined up, what we're going to do again is, at this level, we're not going to name them, or we will, but we're just going to name them with a letter, okay?
So this is where we start, right?
We have these birophytes.
Perhaps I'll grab a couple samples of these, and I'll bring them to letter A.
so that everyone will know when they do the random sampling what letter A looks like or what species or specimen letter A is.
Do you want us to write the species for you?
Well, I think for now let's not do that because it'll take a little longer because not everyone has done that.
But the next stage of this is looking at species A, once we have them all lined up, we will formulate our own description for each of our specimen, creating a key.
Right?
So in classrooms where I've done this, I've actually had a big whiteboard and it's all on one whiteboard.
We tape a specimen and we write a little description, right, to help students along the way.
What we did just now is we extrapolated this, right, and we transferred it amongst five different groups.
Yeah, that's another thing too is like, what a great homework exercise, right?
First you collect all the data.
Maybe the next day you want to clean up the data and you want to use their names.
Hey, perhaps at this stage everyone takes a picture of all the specimen they found.
And then they go home and they try to give that name to it, right?
Maybe it's genus species or maybe it's just a common name.
Either or, that's not the premise.
Whatever you think is best.
But the next stage here is giving each one a description.
I think the idea behind not giving a name right away also focused on knowing a name that we forget and take a picture of something.
But like when we began out by the friendship circle, this is more about connecting and getting to know something through making a personal connection.
That's why the descriptors are so important.
Drawing that connection with students and stewardship in the land.
When you meet someone, what's the first thing you usually learn about them is their name?
And then how well do you know them?
all you really know about them is their name.
So when we're teaching kids about different species, there's a lot of benefit in learning the name eventually, but it's more interesting for them to really look at the organism and say, what makes this one different from that one?
How do I know what's in this family?
What similarities, what differences does it have?
And then eventually they can learn the name.
But just knowing the name of a plant doesn't always tell you that much about those species or the surrounding species.
We'll play a name game later.
with people's names.
So I think at this point, what we could do to continue modeling how you could do this in the classroom, can we come up with a general consensus for how to describe each of these viral fights here?
Like as a whole, how did you guys describe them in your groups?
You've already done this.
We have one, two, three, four, maybe five samples.
So we have five different unique ways of describing this.
Can we come up with the group consensus?
Low, low, spiky.
We got low, spiky.
Well, spiky shape, soft texture.
Maybe feathery more than spiky would be a... Does that sound good to us?
Okay, then we move on to the next one.
How would you describe this plant?
Trilope.
White flowers.
Ooh, white flowers.
Fibrous roots.
Ah!
Green.
Yeah, nice.
Mm-hmm.
Anybody else say something that we didn't hear?
Feel free to.
And if we look closer, I think like.
Yeah, we could get into like the science stuff that students already know, right?
And then, like, I think something else, like, you know this is clover, but how do you know it's clover?
By that, like, white little marking, right?
Yeah, yeah.
That's the type of clover, yeah.
Yeah.
Lots of clovers.
So, that's that leaf white marking.
Okay.
So, let's move to C. We have arugula.
What?
Broadleaf plantain.
All right, let's describe it.
You have a bug bite you can chew it up and put it on it.
Green.
Broad oval leaf.
Yeah, it's broad.
It's clumps, growing clumps.
Do any of them have their little spikes?
I was going to say, there's some of them that have the flower coming up.
Yeah, here have a flower.
Clumps.
And then we could say,
this is flower good description and it's where where is it located is it center in the center in center of clump of leaf clump it's clump i could add that in there it's clump it's clump it's clump all right what about the grass what about this one that's what color is it green
Tell me about the leaves.
Skinny.
Flat.
What is it called when they come off one stem?
Branching.
Branching, yeah.
It's also nice to get the students to touch each one, right?
To feel like what that stem does.
It clumps.
Yes, those of you that have, we didn't have that one, so it clumps.
Oh, absolutely.
There's a term for when the leaf is blade-like, when it's sword-like.
It's a bladed leaf.
I'm thinking of, like, gladiolas that are named after the Roman sword, but I feel like there's one that's a name for, like, the blade shape of grass, but I can't remember.
Give it the blade shape of grass.
This one looks like, if you compare these two, right, like that one looks like your quintessential grass at home or something, right?
That's that blade of grass.
What's this little light thing?
Oh, we haven't done height.
Height would be good.
But that's something you could add in your class.
You can measure all these things, too.
So these have like a V-shaped, like, blade.
Because they're going to have like a vein, a sedge.
So, I mean, we can't write that because it's named, but.
And I wouldn't, it's not a crump, but it's like a point.
Yeah, it does.
Clusters?
Clusters, sure.
Small clusters.
All right, other.
OK, what time is it?
10.22.
Okay, so at this point I do, if it's okay, we can go back to the stuff that is included in the criteria.
So, in your journals and thank you.
Here's a better dandelion, more complete.
Oh nice, yeah.
So, no, make a note that A is this guy, B is this, C is this, D is this, E is this, and then any others that you may note.
You're going to diagram out your quadrat.
You're going to label where the A's are, where the B's are.
You're going to have a little data table of how many you think you can find.
And all of that is written under the criteria, and there's also descriptions and examples in there, okay?
So it's like the fourth page or something that says criteria, and then it says examples.
You can go count first and then come back to match which path you have.
That's true too, yeah.
Yeah, I think either way.
F is other.
Yeah, that's just whatever else you find.
There's a lot of, well, most of ours is F. Whiskey.
That's because you went off the beaten path.
Well, we went to the edge of it.
All right, toss that Lulu Hoop somewhere.
I did that on purpose.
There's also little tiny mats you can sit on if you don't want to get wet.
Yeah, move it.
Now we're doing a total new random sample.
This thing keeps falling on me.
I don't know.
It's not growing there.
I probably wouldn't.
Alright, so... My hoop is slightly distended.
All right.
So, no, I forgot what A was.
A was like all the moss.
B was clover.
C. C was like the plantain.
Okay.
C was plantain.
Was B clover?
I think that was.
Uh, B is clover.
Okay.
D was the grass, broad grass.
E was the skinny grass.
And then you got C as the plantain?
Yeah.
Okay.
And then F was?
F was everything else.
Anything else.
Yeah.
All right.
Cool.
See See see see see See see see See I'd say count well Yeah, I'd say count it.
It's over here.
Isn't it see I
another one yeah it is do count okay well a b c d e